 One day, the nerdy Milton Fauster and his kleptomaniac sister Marlo are in the Grizzly Mall of Generica, Kansas. They go into a store and Milton unwittingly steals some lip gloss. As Marlo and Milton are running through the mall with the security guard chasing them, Milton realizes Marlo tricked him into stealing lip gloss.They take a brake for a moment and they stop in front of a giant marshmallow model of a Grizzly Bear, and Milton sees Damian Ruffino, his extremely unhygienic tormentor and bully at school. He is sticking some dynamite in the marshmallow Grizzly Bear Statue's you-know-where. Before the mall security guards can catch up with them, the marshmallow Grizzly Bear explodes and Milton and Marlo both die. Damian also dies. The last thing they see is flaming marshmallow all over the mall. Now, Milton and Marlo are holding hands and plummeting downward and Milton feels a slight sting. He and Marlo land, and they found themselves in a terrible school in Limbo where the principal Bea "Elsa" Bubb torments them with things they wish they could have. But, Damian is getting the special treatment. The teachers are rude, mean, and disgusting. The children are terrified. They now find themselves in Limbo, the waiting area for the Nine Circles of Heck, which include Rapacia, Blimpo, Precocia, Sadia, Snivel, Fibble, Lipptor, and Dupli-City. When Milton meets Virgil, his new and now only best friend, they and Marlo plan an escape to return to Earth, instead of spending the rest of their lives tormented in Heck. Each book in the series deals with a realm of the afterlife of Heck. "" Circles of Heck"" Limbo : First place where kids arrive after they die, where their souls are weighed and assessed. Rapacia : Where the greedy kids go. Blimpo : Where the fat kids go. Fibble : Where the lying kids go. Snivel : Where the whiny kids go. Precocia : Where the smarty-pants kids that grow up too fast go. Lipptor : Where the kids who sass back go. Sadia : Where the bullies go. Dupli-City : Where the back-stabbing kids go. Honors Rapacia: The Second Circle of Heck was nominated for an Oregon Book Award. Other Books Released in the Series Rapacia: The Second Circle of Heck was released in July, 2009. Blimpo: The Third Circle of Heck was released in May, 2010. Fibble: The Fourth Circle of Heck was released May, 2011. Snivel: The Fifth Circle of Heck was released on May 22, 2012. Precocia: The Sixth Circle of Heck will be released in February 2013.
