 Partly autobiographical, the story is about Krish and Ananya who hail from two different states of India, are deeply in love and want to get married. The story begins in the IIM Ahmedabad mess, where Krish, a Punjabi boy from Delhi sights a beautiful girl, Ananya, a Tamilian from Chennai, quarreling with the mess staff about the food. Ananya was tagged as the "Best girl of the fresher batch". They become friends within a few days and decide to study together every night. In mean time, they become romantically involved. They both get jobs, and have serious plans for their wedding. At first Krish tries to convince his girlfriend Ananya's parents and at last and convinces them by helping Ananya's father to do his first PowerPoint Presentation, her brother, Manju, by giving him tuition and later convinces her mom by asking her sing in a concert organised by Krish's office, i.e Citibank. She was convinced as she had her biggest dream of singing in a big concert comes to be true. She sang along with T.S Subramanium and Hariharan. Then they tried to convince Krish's mom the problem was Krish's mother's relatives who doesn't quite like this, they say that Krish should not marry a Madrasi but ends up agreeing with them when Ananya tries to help one of Krish's cousin to get married and succeeds to do so. Now as they have convinced both their parents they now try to make their parents meet each other to know each. They go to GOA. But this dream of theirs ends as Ananya's parents finds something fishy between Krish's mom and him. Ananya's family end up deciding that Krish and Ananya will not marry each other But at last Krish's father who was like an enemy for Krish helps Krish and Ananya to get married as he convinces Ananya's family well. They really do very hard to convince each other parents and finally make it. It is narrated in a first person point of view in a humorous tone, often taking digs at both Tamil and Punjabi cultures . The novel ends with Ananya giving birth to twin boys. They say that the babies belong to a state called 'India'; with a thought to end inequality. What is even more interesting is the continuation of character Hari of Five Point Someone in Krish.
