 Narrated by Mello it recounts the first time L worked with Naomi Misora, searching for clues and trying to prevent the next victim of a psychotic serial killer, who is able to make murders look like suicides. The plot also has an interesting backstory to the orphanage from which L came from, Wammy's House, and the relationship between Naomi Misora and Raye Penber. The serial killer just happens to be and old aquantance of L's, one of his original successors: B (Beyond Birthday),who ran away from Wammy's house shortly after A's (the first of L's succecers)suicide . This tragedy, along with B's shinigami eyes drove him over the edge and started committing murders. B became the most famous serial killer in L.A., and L's leading case. Hearing about the murders, L recruited Naomi Misora (a former F.B.I. employee and current friend of L) to help in the case. During the case, she meets a detective named Rue Ryuzaki (B posing as an alias of L) ,she keeps close contact with L during her time working with Ryuzaki.Since the first three murders have already occurred Ryuzaki and Misora study the scenes for any missing clues. They solved the various puzzles, which led them to the address of a victim or show them the name of the victim who was next. At Backyard Bottomslash's (the third victim's) house they found a clue to the next victim's whereabouts: a hotel in Pasedena. They deduced that the victim's initials would be B.B. again ,since the were two people in the hotel who had those initials (Blackberry Brown and Bluesharp Babysplit ). In rooms 1313 and 404, respectively. They paid off the patrons and put them up in very nice suites.They both went to the different rooms(Misora in 1313,and Ryuzaki in 404). Misora starts to think, she pieces everything together and realizes who Luxaky is and that he was using her for fun and testing her intelligence. She rushes down the stairs to find that Ryuzaki (BB/Rue) has lit himself on fire. He was barely alive, so she decided to turn him in. He went to the hospital and survived with ony mild burns. He was sent to prison, and some years later died of a heart attack, supposedly one of the criminals killed by Kira. Later, while waiting at a bus stop,s he saw a man than looked a little like BB, he leaned over to her, she thought he was going to hug her, instead he tried to attack her but she managed to kick him down the nearby subway stairs. She felt guilty and went to check on him. She helped him up and he shook her hand and held it for a few seconds. He walked away but looked back a little, sucking on his thumb. (it was obviously L ,although she didn't really notice)
