 On Vatnajökull, a glacier in Iceland, Artemis unveils the Ice Cube, his invention to stop global warming (by shooting reflective nano wafers into the clouds, and having them rain down with the snow, and when they land, they reflect the suns light and insulate the icebergs), to Captain Holly Short, Foaly, and Wing Commander Vinyáya. During the presentation, Artemis counts his words, and Holly and Foaly conclude that he has Atlantis Complex, a psychological fairy disease with symptoms including OCD, paranoia, and split personality disorder. In the middle of the meeting, Artemis' scans pick up a UFO. Foaly confirms the scans, and Artemis suddenly mentally snaps, accusing Foaly of trying to steal his invention. Holly then tries mesmerising him, but they are attacked by a mysterious spacecraft that Foaly designed to search for life on Mars. The craft crash lands, hits a shuttle, and instantly kills Commander Vinyáya and all LEP backup, leaving Holly, Foaly and Artemis stranded on the glacier without communications, weapons, or Butler. Meanwhile, Artemis's bodyguard Butler is in Mexico. A paranoid Artemis tricked him into travelling to Cancun by telling him his sister Juliet, now a famous wrestler nicknamed "Jade Princess", was in danger. Coincidentally, Juliet and Butler barely escape a horde of zombie-like wrestling fans remotely mesmerised by Turnball Root, former commander Julius Root's reprobate brother. Despite losing his magic through committing crimes, Turnball restores his magic by eating a combination of mandrakes and rice wine. He escapes with several accomplices and reaches Leonor, his human wife. He kidnaps N°1 to reverse the ageing on his wife, but Orion, Artemis' alter ego who is not affected by the mind control, saves N°1 and Holly. When Leonor hears that Turnball has rigged a shuttle to explode Leonor decides that she does not want to be young again and that she wishes only to fly for one last time. Turnball can't bear the thought of life without her. She and Turnball ride deep into the ocean in the shuttle that then promptly explodes. In the epilogue, Artemis is his obsessive, compulsive self again and on a transport shuttle to the Argon clinic for therapy. Juliet is engaged in a wrestling match with a jumbo pixie guard, much to the entertainment of Mulch and the shuttle crew. Artemis and Foaly are teasing Holly about her recent date with Trouble Kelp. Butler calls Angeline Fowl, telling her that Artemis has a fairy disease similar to OCD. Angeline wants to visit him and is very worried and upset.
