 The graphic novel is a self contained story, venturing into political ground that Jamie Delano is well known for. The story starts with a scene in Iraq, where a small town was bombed. The U.S. Army manages to detain a man said to be responsible. While being interrogated, the man unleashes a supernatural power that kills the soldiers and destroys the camp. In London, chance encounter with a young Muslim girl on the tube leads a curious Constantine to the British Museum. The museum is bombed, but Constantine and the girl manage to escape. However upon reaching home, Constantine was framed for his involvement in the bombing and is captured. As a result, John Constantine is forced by MI6 to visit Iraq and investigate a supernatural entity that has been plaguing the war torn place. While in Iraq, the Muslim girl shows up again, introducing herself as Assera Al-Aswari and is an agent of MI6. The two later drive into an army camp to discuss the events. Constantine deduces that the place they were at was an ancient city, containing an ancient Sumerian temple. Aseera later explains that the place is named Kutha. In the cover of night, John uses magic to sneak out and investigate more. He later finds out that the city is actually a den of demons, before he is detained by Aseera for sneaking out. The next day, John and Aseera later visits the mysterious detainee who has been plaguing the army. John discovers that the man isn't human, but is a djinn. He later traps it inside a bottle, before the camp they were at was attacked by insurgents. John, Aseera, and the djinn escapes, but is soon stranded in the road. While waiting, John explains to Aseera that the detainee is actually a djinn, and that Kutha is actually a city that once worshiped a god named Nergal, who is also John's longtime adversary. The two was soon kidnapped by insurgents, and was handed over to Nergal. Nergal welcomes John to Hell, where he explains his involvement in the war. Nergal was actually collecting the souls of those who died, and traps them in Hell to power himself up, using djinns as his workers. John later challenges Nergal for the souls in a game of poker. Nergal and his confidants agreed, but in turn if John looses he will be "cleaning [Nergal]'s ass with his tongue". John cheats his way to victory, and Nergal is forced to free the souls with John and Aseera. With his mission completed John returns to London for his end of the bargain. In the MI6 headquarters, he releases the djinn and intimidates the MI6 officials to free Aseera in Iraq and give her a new life with luxury, while John's gain will be doubled. The officials later agrees. Upon hearing this, John walks out, happy that he straighten everything out.
