 Isabelle Lee is a 13 year old girl whose world got turned upside down after the death of her father. Isabelle’s life seemed somewhat perfect before her father’s death. That soon changed along with her mother’s behavior, her developing a new habit of binge eating, and her relationship with little sister April. Her mother went from being a full time English professor to a part time English professor, who spent the rest of that time in bed complaining of being tired. Her mom was suffering with depression due to her husband’s death. Not only did Isabelle’s mom have trouble coping with the death; Isabelle was also having trouble dealing with the death of her father. She dealt with the death by eating away her emotions and then throwing them up, better known as binge eating. This new habit was discovered by her little sister April, referred to as Ape Face, and then she reported this finding to her mother. This is the part of the book where Isabelle is forced to go to group pyscotherapy because her mother is making her in hopes that she will stop this horrible habit.At first Isabelle is completely against talking to strangers about her problems coping with her father’s death; during group Isabelle realizes the most popular, pretty, rich, smart, and nice girl in school; Ashley Barnum faces the same problems she does. They soon become friends and eat huge amounts of food before throwing up together at sleepovers. Isabelle begins to hang out with the "cool" kids at school, leaving her old friends behind. One night at a sleepover when Ashley is getting food for the two Isabelle finds footnotes for the current book they're reading in English class, realizes Ashley cheats to get good grades and appear smart. Isabelle begins to see the shrink who is in charge of group alone once a week and tells her about her and Ashley's relationship- while disguising Ashley with the code name "Penelope". One day Ashley doesn't come to school and despite them being annoyed with her for leaving them, Isabelle sits with her old friends. That night Ashley spends the night at Isabelle's house for the first time and reveals her parents are getting divorced, the reason she wasn't at school that day. Ashley and Isabelle begin to binge again but Isabelle stops and decides not to throw up with her friend this time. Isabelle soon realizes that group has helped her not only cope with her father’s death but make friends with one of the most popular girls at school. Isabelle realizes towards the end that the once strangers in group are just people like her, who are suffering with an eating disorder because they simply cannot cope. By the end of the book, Isabelle has gone 35 hours and counting without throwing up, has become friends with Ashley Barnum (aka the popular girl), and has gotten her mother back in her life.
