 Esi Sekyi approaches Linga HideAways Travel Agency in order to finalize travel arrangements – a task Esi has taken on in the absence of her company’s regular secretary. She meets Ali Kondey, the charming owner of the travel agency who assures her that his agency will take care of everything. Esi leaves in her beat-up car and Ali praises Allah for the gift of his woman. Sometime later, Esi’s husband Oko forces her to have sex with him, which she regards as the last straw in their already-deteriorating marriage. Esi then goes to work and tries to pull herself together while searching her native tongue – presumably an African dialect – for a word to describe what just has just happened. She concludes that although her native language has no word for it, in English it might be called “marital rape.” Esi’s best friend, Opokuya, is then introduced, her character standing in fierce contrast to Esi’s. Although their marriage is generally happy, Opokuya and her husband, Kubi, frequently argue about who will have the family car for the day. On this particular occasion, Kubi wins and they agree that he will pick Opokuya up at the Hotel Twentieth Century after work. Esi runs into Opokuya in the lobby of that hotel and the two quickly begin a conversation about Esi’s decision to leave her husband. The story recounts Ali’s friendship and eventual marriage to his college friend Fusena. As they had children, motherhood consumed Fusena’s life, forcing her to stop working and temporarily stifling her desire for higher education. Esi and Ali’s relationship develops as they become lovers. As Esi finds herself becoming more dependent on Ali’s affection, she is disappointed when he fails to visit her for two weeks. When Ali finally reappears, he proposes to Esi, offering her a ring to show that she is “occupied territory.” The marriage negotiations begin as Ali travels to the village where Esi’s family lives in order to discuss the marriage. However, his request is denied due to his failure to bring a proper relative to the negotiations. It becomes clear that both Ali’s and Esi’s families are reluctant to agree to such a union, especially when some of the polygamy traditions have already been breached. Both families eventually agree and Ali and Esi are married in a simple ceremony. On New Year’s Eve, Ali visits Esi before going home and while Ali is there, Oko drives up to Esi’s house with their daughter, Ogyaanowa, in tow. The two men fight and Esi bolts, taking Ogyaanowa to Opokuya’s house. Esi recounts the events to Opokuya and Kubi, who drives over to Esi's to check on her house, only to find that both men have disappeared. Ali and Esi go on a holiday to Ali’s home village, Bamako and they spend their time there like tourists. After they return, Ali becomes more distant, spending more time with his attractive new secretary. Esi spends Christmas alone, taking sleeping pills to reign in her deep sense of abandonment. On New Year’s Day, Ali finally reappears, offering her a new car as a bribe. He then immediately leaves. Esi shows off her new car to Opokuya and offers Opokuya her old car. Ali continues to give Esi bribes as substitutes for his presence. After three years, Esi finally breaks down and tells Ali that their relationship has deteriorated. Opokuya finally picks up her car from Esi's house and leaves. Later, Kubi shows up, supposedly searching for his wife. He begins to kiss Esi and Esi considers sleeping with him but decides that she could betray Opokuya like that. Esi and Ali never divorce, remaining friends and sometimes lovers.
