 Mycroft Holmes invites Sherlock and his tutor, Amyus Crowe, to London for a visit. When they arrive at the Diogenes Club they find Mycroft holding a dagger over a dead body. The police arrive soon and arrest Mycroft, leaving Sherlock and Amyus to prove his innocence. They find some clues at the murder scene; a business card, a small bottle with a clear liquid in it, and a small wooden case. They determine that the business card is freshly printed and look for printers around London who might have created it. The pair split up and Sherlock locates the right printer which leads him to a bouncer in a local tavern. Sherlock tails the bouncer, but the bouncer manages to turn the tables on him, and chases Sherlock into the sewers inhabited by London's abandoned and feral children. Sherlock has to run for his life to escape them, and ends up at the London Necropolis Railway. Sherlock and Amyus meet up again and have dangerous encounter with a falcon in an animal museum. From there it becomes evident that events occurring in Russia may be linked to Mycroft's frame-up. Due to the mysterious disappearance of Mycroft's agent Robert Wormersley who was located in Moscow, Sherlock and Mycroft accompanied by Rufus Stone will have to go to Moscow. Sherlock, as a part of their disguise, joins a traveling theater troupe to Russia to uncover the truth. In Russia they find Wormesley's house in a state of chaos , it is then apparent that someone was searching for several objects. On their way back to the hotel, Sherlock is framed up for pick-pocketing. Sherlock then runs as the police is on his trail ,he soon finds himself in a dead end , and the only way to escape was via a manhole. While he descends, he can hear the people who set him state that the manhole led to a tributary of the Moscow river, the Neglinnaya, Sherlock then goes downstream in order to make it to the river. He is soon chased by the people who set him up. While navigating through the river he meets a pack of dogs that have adapted to survive in dark tunnels. Sherlock sees there larger than ordinary ears and speculates that their sense of hearing is greater than those of the normal dogs, Knowing this Sherlock does not make a noise, but due to the twitching of his finger the dogs get ready to pounce on him , at this moment Sherlock's pursuer has his hand over Sherlock's neck ,his hand is bitten by a dog and he loosens his grip allowing Sherlock to escape. Sherlock soon finds his way in the Moscow river and climbs on its banks , only to see Mycroft being arrested by Russia's secret police-the Third Section. He is then met by Robert Wormesley who was watching Mycroft's arrest and tells him that they both will have to plan the next move in order to save Mycroft's life. Both of them chat in a cafe , where Sherlock deduced that Mycroft was being taken to be framed for the murder of Count Shuvalov's murder and he will
