 =Introduction= Professor Gaylord M. Sneedly, Melvin Sneedly's father, accused this book of having many scientific errors and said that cavemen did not co-exist with dinosaurs and to prove that he's right, he claimed that he was a recipient of The Most Brilliantest Science Guy of the Whole Wide World Award. However, creators George and Harold denied that and said they time-traveled and witnessed that cavemen did co-exist with dinosaurs. They said scientists do not really know everything and make guesses based on evidence they already discovered (Which actually is true, as every year, new discoveries are being made.) so they called this book "the first book based on science facts." =Plot= Their story begins with two cavekids named Ook Schadowski and Gluk Jones who live in Caveland, Ohio. The dictator of Caveland, Chief Goppernopper, hated those kids but forced Ook's sister Gak to marry him. Ook and Gluk became friends with a Tyrannosaurus rex Mog-Mog and her baby and they all ruined Goppernopper's wedding, making Gak happy. Angered by this, Goppernopper walks away with his guards until Goppernopper met his descendent, J.P. Goppernopper, who is the CEO of Goppernopper Enterprises from the year 2222. The two Goppernoppers worked together to steal natural resources from cavemen days through time portal since all natural resources will be used up by 2222. Ex-Chief Goppernopper goes back to the past and forced every cavemen living in Caveland to become slaves for the rest of their lives, making them official property of Goppernopper Enterprises. Becoming slaves, Ook, Gluk, and baby Mog-Mog were shoveling until the two Goppernoppers took the cavekids to 2222 to torture them, but baby Mog-Mog followed them to help them escape. Ook, Gluk, and baby Mog-Mog hid in Master Wong's School of Kung-Fu. There they trained and became good at kung-fu. Ook fell in love with Master Wong's daughter, Lan. Lan named baby Mog-Mog "Lily" after her favorite flower. Ook and Gluk grew up, training under Master Wong and no matter how good they were at kung-fu, Master Wong did not award them new belts as they constantly requested. In order to get new belts, the cavemen had to give the right answer to Master Wong's question: Who is the greatest man? When it was time for Ook and Gluk to save their village, they finally answered who the greatest man is: Nobody. It was a correct answer to Master Wong's question, so he finally awarded them black belts, telling them that titles and trophies have no value to the man who is at peace with himself and true greatness is anonymous, therefore the greatest man is nobody. Ook and Gluk realized that these belts have no value since they are at peace, but they took the belts anyway. Then Ook, Gluk, and Lily entered Goppernopper Enterprises, time-traveled back to cavemen days, and kung-fued the guards only to free the slaves. Then Ook's sister Gak fell in love with Gluk and called him hero. After that, Chief Goppernopper returned and ordered his Mechasaurs (A mechanical T. rex, a mechanical Triceratops, and a mechanical Pteranodon) to attack Ook, Gluk, and Lily. Then Lily and the cavemen spray-painted pictures of themselves on the buildings so the Mechasaurs will destroy anything that has the faces of Lily and the cavemen. They also spray-painted on Goppernopper Enterprises building so it will be destroyed, and spray-painted on the explosive tank, which also destroyed the Mechasaurs themselves. After Ook and Gluk's victory, J.P. Goppernopper sent them a letter, telling them that he captured Master Wong and Lan and that they will be killed if Ook and Gluk won't give up now. When Ook, Gluk, and Lily returned to 2229, they saw Master Wong and Lan tied up. The cavemen wondered how the Goppernoppers found them and the Goppernoppers said that since they realized that Ook and Gluk learned kung-fu, they searched for kung-fu schools in town and there was only one. As soon as the Goppernoppers were going to kill the Wongs, Ook and Gluk pleaded with the Goppernoppers to release the Wongs and said they will do anything. The Goppernoppers agreed and had Ook, Gluk, and Lily handcuffed and changed their minds about releasing the Wongs and vowed to kill them all. Ook and Gluk wondered how to get out of this and Master Wong told them to remember their training. Then Ook and Gluk remembered all of the teachings from Master Wong and finally they got an idea. When J.P. Goppernopper raised his ray gun to kill them, Ook and Gluk asked the Goppernoppers the question: Who is the greatest man? J.P. Goppernopper answered that he is the greatest man while Chief Goppernopper also answered the same thing. After that, the Goppernoppers disagreed with each other and argued about who the greatest man is and got into a fight. J.P. Goppernopper betrays and zaps Chief Goppernopper, killing him. Then J.P. Goppernopper started disappearing since he killed his ancient great-grandfather before he had children. The polluted world was being replaced with the world without Goppernoppers. Then Ook, Gluk, and Lily ran back to the disappearing time portal, but Ook soon returned because of his love for Lan. Lan said she will be his cavewife and they both entered the cavemen days. The time portal and J.P. Goppernopper and his world from 2222 disappear. Then Master Wong walked home where he says there is a part of the kids in him. Lily was finally re-united with her mother Mog-Mog. Ook, Gluk, Lan, Mog-Mog, and Lily returned happily to Caveland.
