 The story follows Michael Vey, a teenager diagnosed with Tourette's syndrome. Although Michael appears normal and has typical hobbies such as playing video games with his best friend Ostin, he secretly has the ability to pulse or surge electricity out of the palms of his hands. After school one day, Michael gets beat up by bullies Jack, Mitchell, and Wade as he is leaving, and a popular cheerleader named Taylor witnesses it. Out of self-defense, Michael touches the three bullies and they fall to the ground. The next day at school, Taylor confronts him about the occasion. After explaining himself, she confesses that she has the ability to "reboot" people and that she can also read minds when she touches someone. They later on discover that they were born in the same hospital near the same date, and a machine made by a company named Elgen was used during their births. The machine went under testing and out of the fifty-nine babies born in the time period only seventeen survived, including Taylor and Michael. Shortly after, both Michael and Taylor receive scholarships from the prestigious Elgen Academy, which claims that it only accepts 17 students every year. When Michael tells his mother about the scholarship, she immediately makes him leave the restaurant they are eating at. On their way to the car, a strange man attempts to rob them. When Michael shocks him, a different man wearing sunglasses, steps out along with two other teenagers. The man reveals himself to be Dr. Hatch. Michael then passes out after being hit by an unknown electrical pulse from one of the teenagers. When Michael wakes up, he is in a hospital and Ostin's mother tells him that his mom has been kidnapped. Meanwhile, Taylor has been taken captive to Elgen Academy in Pasadena, California, where she finds out that she has an identical twin. Taylor soon discovers the dark side of Dr. Hatch; he likes to use the teenagers' powers for his own benefit and pleasure. When given an order by Dr. Hatch, Taylor disobeys him and gets put on Floor D with three other kids. After getting a car ride to Pasadena, Michael unsuccessfully attempts to free Taylor. After being captured, Dr. Hatch tells Michael that Michael killed his own father, and he makes him choose between his own freedom and his friends. Taylor, Ostin, and the other rebels on Floor D escape their cell only to be caught again. Michael is then forced to shock Wade to prove his allegiance to Dr. Hatch. He refuses to shock him and so his mother is shocked and Michael is sent to Cell 25, the torture cell for those who don't "agree" with Dr. Hatch's methods. After 26 days, Michael is released from Cell 25 and is taken to the same room where he "failed" his first test by not shocking Wade. Hatch leaves Michael (who is very ill from his treatment in Cell 25) alongside Ostin, and Taylor, who are restrained in chairs. Ostin and Taylor are supposed to be killed by Zeus, but after Michael tricks Zeus into shocking him, he grows more powerful from Zeus's lightning and his able to pulse and knock him unconscious. He checks on Taylor who is okay, and then Ostin, but finds that his heart has stopped. After applying two shocks in a fashion similar to a defibrillator Ostin's heart starts up again. Taylor then goes into the mind of Zeus and searches his memories, to find that Hatch tricked him into believing that he killed his family while swimming in a pool at the age of 7. He then sides with Michael and the rest of the Electroclan and helps them break Ian, McKenna, and Abigail out of their cell, and using his powers, disables all the cameras they come across. A lengthy battle between the Electroclan and Dr. Hatch's loyalists occurs, Michael's group is able to take control of the control room and released the human captives (including Jack and Wade) who overpower the remaining guards that Michael and his group haven't already disabled, while Dr. Hatch escapes from Elgen Academy in a helicopter with most of the other electric children that are loyal to him (with the exception of Nichelle whom he leaves behind) to another location. After the battle, Taylor goes to call her parents, and after dialing three digits walks up to and kisses Michael. Afterward another electric child, Grace, who supposedly ran away from Hatch shows up wanting to join the "Electoclan". With the suspicion that she may be a plant, Taylor reads her mind and confirms that she is against Hatch. Grace also says that she was able to download all of the Elgen's computer files, before they were deleted, onto herself (her power being that she is able to upload and download data from computers like a flash drive). The book ending with Ostin proclaiming that "This is the rise of the Electoclan!".
