 A more claustrophobic narrative landscape than before; the plot consists of a shift between the past and the present-day account of the murder investigation, but the link twixt the alternating narratives is not revealed until the end:-there are also multiple side stories which make for a somewhat cluttered plot. The roots of the theme lies in an earlier generation and can be attributed, at least in part, to the upbringing of offspring. In the present, Eric/ Patrik try to find a suitable parenting means; even the incompetent police chief becomes obliquely involved in raising an infant, albeit belatedly. Used in this novel skilfully is the utilization of a secondary story, delivered to us a couple of pages at a time, at long intervals; This sub-plot is perfectly timed, revealing the killer’s motive or insanity, at just the correct pace. In fact it's not at any one particular moment when you realise who the killer is – that’s the skill. The remote resort of Fjällbacka has seen its share of disaster, though perhaps none worse than that of the young child found in a fisherman′s net. The gruesome post-mortem shows that this is no case of accidental drowning. The death of Sara, an eight-year-old girl, is no less shocking for Patrik Hedström having just become a father. This is a child both he and his partner Erica knew well. It is his grim task to discover who could be behind the methodical murder. What he does not know is how this case will reach into the blackened heart of Fjällbacka and the town′s history, ripping apart its idyllic façade, perhaps permanently. An interesting aside is that the parents of the dead child live with the maternal grandmother, Lilian, an acerbic hag engaged in a never ending battle with her 'Neighbour from Hell' Kaj, who has built a new domicile next door to her profound chagrin; Kaj has a reclusive autistic son, Morgan, who spends many hours isolated in his room working on his computer; the finer of suspicion begins to point to him as the possible murderer, particularly as he had seen and spoken to the child on the fatal day they died. The plot is further complicated by the fact that Erica is a good friend of Sara's mother, Charlotte – bonded by both recently having had children. Another detective story with a plot twist that takes until the end to discern; enjoyable literature- not too demanding but intelligent; the only qualm is perhaps that most detective stories seem to have a protagonist detective - this doesn't which some might miss. This novel would be more satisfying if only the author planned a much nicer motive;If only the killer wasn't the person.
