 Nate and Teddy are standing looking at the bulletin board looking at baby pictures for the "Guess that Baby!" game. Teddy points out a picture saying it's the ugliest. Nate realizes it's his picture. Francis walks up saying it's easy to tell it's Nate because he is drooling and he is trying to put a square peg in a round hole. Nate finds a baby picture of Francis and makes fun of it by saying Francis looked like a sumo wrestler in the picture. Teddy refuses to show Nate and Francis his picture. Then Nate finds Jenny's picture. He says it is the best looking baby by far. Gina walks up asking is he sure it's Jenny. He says it is. She goes up and peels off the picture. Nate tells her not to because it's not hers but it ends up being hers. Everybody laughs at Nate. Nate, Teddy, and Francis walk to Social Studies, and because of the new seating chart, Nate has to sit next to Gina. Then matters get worse when Ms. Godfrey pulls two names for a pair who will work on a project together. Francis and Teddy work to together and Artur and Jenny work together, which annoys Nate. But then Nate finds out he has to work with Gina on a Ben Franklin project. After class, they walk to the gym to see the team captain chart, and Nate is thrilled when it says he is a fleeceball (indoor baseball) captain. Then Randy Betancourt and his gang shows up. Randy sees his name on the chart, and when he sees Nate's name, he says he thought captains had to be good at sports. Then Nate says you don't have to be good at sports to be a captain. To prove this, Nate leads Randy and his gang to his locker. When Nate opens it stuff piles out of it burying Randy and his crew. Nate says you have to be able to outthink your opponent to be a good captain. Afterwards everybody is talking about how Nate punked Randy. Nate is at the library because he got in trouble in science. After the bell Nate has to go back to science so Mr. Galvin so he can lecture Nate. Nate realizes he's late to picking teammembers. After he gets to the gym he finds out Coach Calhoun already chose his team. Although discouraged at first, he is extra satisfied that Gina is on his team because now she is under his control. When Nate gets home he is thinking of a name for the team. When he hears Spitsy barking like crazy he gets a name, the Physco Dogs. The next day, Nate and his friends are walking to school, when Chad shows up. He tells Nate that Randy's looking for him. He says it's payback time. Nate thinks the school safety policy will keep him safe until he sees that Coach John is on duty. Nate thinks that if he sees Randy bossing him around, Coach John will let it go. Then Nate decides to run into the building, but Randy chases him. Then Principal Nichols stops them. Nate tries to get out of the situation by telling him that he's going to the computer lab to work on his Ben Franklin project, but Randy says he is, too. Then Principal Nichols asks the couple a question about Ben Franklin. When Nate answers correctly, Principal Nichols lets Nate go to the computer lab while Randy goes back outside. The bell rings, and Nate goes through a few classes. In art, the class is making clay sculptures, and Nate makes a Phsyco Dog mascot, and when Francis guesses it is a walrus, an annoyed Nate tells him it's a Phsyco Dog. Then Francis reminds him that he needed to tell Coach the fleeceball name by homeroom. After the bell rings, Nate rushes to Coach's office. Coach says Gina chose the name. Nate looks at the fleeceball schedule, and is shocked to discover that his team is named the Kuddle Kittens. Even though Nate still conciders that the name of his fleeceball team is still Psycho Dogs though nobody else calls them the Psycho Dogs after they read the bulletin board. Nate trying to get revenge on Gina by "accidentally" spilling egg salad on her but accidentally trips and spills it on his crush Jenny though Coach doesn't give him detention Jenny gets so mad at Nate even shouting IDIOT! at him.
