 Written between the years 1923-1931, In the Light of Truth is a collection of 91 lectures addressing all spheres of life, ranging from God and the Universe to the Laws in Creation, free will and responsibility, intuition and the intellect, the ethereal world and the beyond, justice and love. It answers eternal questions such as what does it mean to be human, what is the purpose of life on earth, and what happens after death. It also explains the causes and significance of the unprecedented crises facing humanity today and our responsibilities to the future. The publishers write "This book ... answers with clarity all the unsolved questions of human existence. The recognitions mediated with this book are so immense that they force the unprejudiced reader to ponder, investigate and go forward. The Grail Message will appeal to any human being who is seeking to understand life, his or her place in Creation, and the source of one’s being." In the Light of Truth: The Grail Message purports to gives spiritual support for the problems and questions in life: Where do we come from? Where do we go when we die? What about fate and karma, Divine justice, free will, the Mission of Jesus, the Son of God, the Laws of Nature and Creation, and many others. In the Light of Truth also gives information about the mythical Holy Grail. While ancient sagas and legends, and modern art, depict the Grail as an earthly myth, without being able to provide a conclusive explanation of its significance, Abd-ru-shin describes the Grail as a spiritual reality of the highest order, the connecting point between the Creator and His Creation. According to the Creation myth given in The Grail Message, human beings are actually only guests on this earth. They came from a spiritual realm, which is far above the world of earthly matter, in order to begin a course of development leading down to this earth. This path continues for each person through repeated earth lives (reincarnation). Through experiencing man&#39;s inner, spiritual consciousness develops, grows, and matures. This is the prerequisite for the way back to the spiritual realm, which is the goal of his path of development: man can and should return to the immortality of the spiritual realm as a conscious spiritual entity, and thus enter &#34;Paradise.&#34; In the Light of Truth: The Grail Message supposes that &#34;The Laws of Creation&#34; provide each human spirit with support on his way. Unchangeably interwoven from the beginning, they bear within, like the Ten Commandments, the Love, Grace, and Justice of the Creator. To truly know and understand the way these laws work is essential for successfully navigating one&#39;s way through life. Therefore, the explanation of these Laws runs like a thread through the lectures of The Grail Message. The book also describes the relationship between the sexes: &#34;male&#34; and &#34;female&#34; each represent a specific, separate &#34;principle,&#34; each of equal value for the total Creation. Therefore, any claims by the sexes for special rights are untenable, as is the view that man and woman are the same in their qualities and nature. In the Light of Truth also contends that there is a polarity between man and woman, which since it has been incorrectly understood in the past has led over the centuries to constant battles between the sexes. The Grail Message purports that the only way to end the conflict is to recognize and understand the special qualities of each sex and their special tasks in Creation. Finally, the Grail Message proposes to explain to mankind the &#34;how&#34; of diseases, which it explains as consequences of karmic returns of the karmic sowings of man through his intuitive perception, thoughts and deeds. Explaining that only in the light of Divine Knowledge will it be possible for the spirit to once again become strong by itself and be able to bring about resistance to diseases, especially when the time arrives for all diseases to become as good as incurable. Abd-ru-shin gives insight into the way and process behind diseases such as cancer etc. Admonishing that the way of Truth and Light will lead onwards as would help restore mankind from diseases, spiritually.
