Percy Jackson is a twelve-year-old boy from New York City, and up until a few months ago he was a boarding student at Yancy Academy, a privade boarding school for troubled kids in upstate New York. He says he didn't want to be a half-blood, and advises any readers who think they might be one to close this book immediately. He backs up to tell the story of how it all started.

He and his sixth-grade class at Yancy go on a field trip to Manhattan to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, planning to see ancient Greek and Roman artifacts. Mr. Brunner, their Latin teacher whom Percy really likes, is leading the trip. Percy hopes he will not get in trouble on this trip, but he starts to get mad when Nancy Bobofit throws bits of peanut butter at his best friend Grover. Grover warns him not to do anything, because he knows if anything happens, Percy will get blamed, as usual.

Mr. Brunner grills Percy on the story of the Titan Kronos who ate his children, and tells Percy he must start thinking about how important this information is in his real life. Percy is frustrated, and when Nancy Bobofit continues to torment Grover, she suddenly finds herself sitting in the fountain, claiming Percy pushed her. Percy does not know what happened, but he knows he is in trouble.

Mrs. Dodds, the math teacher, tells Percy to come with her. She starts telling Percy to confess, but he has no idea what she is talking about. Suddenly she turns into a strange creature with leathery wings. Mr. Brunner comes in and throws a pen at Percy, and as soon as it hits his hand, it turns into a sword. Mrs. Dodds flies at him, shouting for him to die, but as soon as Percy's blade hits her shoulder she explodes into yellow powder and disappears. Percy is stunned, and goes back to his class—his classmates, however, claim that they have never had a Mrs. Dodds as a teacher and they have no idea what he is talking about.

Back at school, the students continue to deny Mrs. Dodds' existence. Percy knows something has happened, and it makes him irritable, so his grades begin to slip and he gets in trouble often. The headmaster sends his mother a letter saying he will not be invited back to Yancy Academy. Percy hears Mr. Brunner having a conversation with Grover about Mrs. Dodds and being worried about Percy, and he realizes something is happening behind his back.

Percy and Grover head back to Manhattan on the same Greyhound bus. Percy tells Grover he overheard him talking to Mr. Brunner, and Grover tells Percy that he has been trying to protect him. Before he can explain, the bus breaks down, and on the side of the road Percy sees three old ladies knitting socks. He watches one of them take out her scissors and cut the yarn. When they get back on the bus, Grover asks Percy what he saw, and freaks out when Percy tells him. Percy guesses that the snipping of the yarn means someone is going to die.

Percy ditches Grover as soon as they get to the bus terminal in New York and heads uptown to his apartment. He tells readers about his mother, Sally Jackson, an amazing woman who has unfortunately had some terrible luck—the one good break she got was meeting Percy's dad, of whom Percy himself has no memories. They were not married, and one day he left to sail out on some journey and never came back. She married an awful man named Gabe Ugliano, who Percy calls Smelly Gabe. Gabe is rude to Percy when he gets back to the apartment, telling him his report card came. Percy feels better about everything when his mother comes home from her job at the candy store in Grand Central Station, giving him a big hug.

She tells Percy that they are going out to Montauk, to the beach cabin where they used to go every summer. Gabe at first refuses to let them go, but eventually allows them to take his car as long as they do not let anything happen to it. They drive out to Montauk, and both Percy and his mother are extremely happy to be there—it was where his mother met his father. She tells Percy his father would be so proud of him, and they talk about him. His mother reveals that she will have to send Percy away to a summer camp keep him safe, because it is not safe for him to be close to her anymore. She does not explain further.

They awake in the middle of the night to a hurricane. There is pounding on their cabin door and it is Grover, and Percy is shocked to see that he is not wearing pants. Instead, where his feet should be are cloven hooves. Grover tells them they need to get away immediately, and they jump in Gabe's car.