Thirteen-year-old Percy Jackson's strange dreams tell him something's wrong at Half-Blood Hill, a summer camp for demigods. He also receives desperate midnight messages from his satyr friend, Grover. Annabeth, a half-human, half-god camper, similar to Percy and Grover, appears at Percy's school and confirms his fears. She saves him from a gang of monsters trying to slaughter him on the dodgeball court. Then she delivers him and his hulking new friend, Tyson, to Half-Blood Hill.

Percy, Tyson and Annabeth find the camp in chaos. Monsters are attacking, and campers desperately try to defend themselves. When Zeus' daughter Thalia turned into a tree six years earlier, her spirit protected the camp from monsters. Now, someone has poisoned Thalia's tree. Percy's mentor, a centaur named Chiron, has been blamed and fired from Half-Blood Hill. A spirit from the fields of punishment named Tantalus has assumed Chiron's position as assistant camp director.

Annabeth reveals that Tyson is a Cyclops, and Poseidon himself claims Tyson as his son (and Percy's half-brother). Percy and Annabeth ask the camp leaders for permission to seek the Golden Fleece, which they believe will heal Thalia's tree. The leaders give the quest to another camper, a belligerent daughter of Ares named Clarisse. Urged on by Hermes, the messenger god, Percy, decides to find the Fleece himself. Annabeth and Tyson join him on this unauthorized journey.

The trio lands on a cruise ship, only to find Luke, a former camper and Percy's nemesis from the first book in this series, The Lightning Thief, is its captain. He is recruiting half-bloods to help him start a new civilization with Kronos at the helm. Kronos, the Titan king and enemy to the gods, was previously cut into pieces but re-forms a little each time a half-blood joins Luke's army.

After escaping from Luke and subsequently battling a multi-headed monster, Percy, Annabeth and Tyson are saved by Clarisse. They all sail on her ghost ship full of dead Confederate soldiers toward the Sea of Monsters (i.e., the Bermuda Triangle) in search of Grover and the Fleece. As they enter the Sea, monsters attack the ship. Percy and Annabeth, thinking they're the sole survivors, sail into the lair of Circe, where Percy is temporarily transformed into a rodent by the man-hating sorceress. They escape once more and sail toward the island of the Sirens. Annabeth desperately wants to hear them. She asks Percy to tie her to something so she can listen but not be lured by their songs. Percy plugs his own ears with wax. Annabeth is so mesmerized that she cuts her way out of her ropes and swims to the island. Percy narrowly saves her.

Percy and Annabeth reach the island of the Cyclops Polyphemus, where they find both Grover and the Fleece. They also discover that Clarisse and Tyson are alive. The heroes battle and trick the Cyclops, escaping with the Fleece. In keeping with the prophesy Clarisse received from the Oracle, the group sends her back to camp via airplane with the Fleece. Luke recaptures Percy, Annabeth, Grover and Tyson. Then Percy sends a message telling the Half-Blood campers that Luke poisoned Thalia's tree. Chiron and his relatives save Percy and friends, returning them to camp where Chiron's name is cleared and he is reinstated. The Fleece heals Thalia's tree, and Thalia herself emerges from the tree as the half-blood she once was.