 The book purports to have been written in 1900 by Archibald Brooks, the main "protector" (vampire slayer). Brooks was killed on the night of May 10, 1920, at his office in the British Museum. The next day, Joshua T. Kraik, a private investigator, went to see his friend, and, when he did, he looked around Brooks' office and found the book. He took a look in it to see that Brooks had planned for him to have it (there was a letter for him from Brooks on the inside front cover), so Joshua took it home with him. When he started reading the book, he found he was to be the next protector, so he read on, taking all information very seriously. He saw everything about the original three fallen ones and their bloodlines. Moloch, the destroyer, whose bloodline kills for no reason. Ba'al, the deceiver, whose bloodline will do anything for power. And Belial, the tortured, who's bloodline suffers remorse for what Belial did and will limit their appetites. Belials can also feel the emotions that a normal person could. He also added notes; things like how he is getting on, a little bit of personal life, drawings, bits of newspaper, his own information, and letters. On the 14th of May in 1920, he got a strange note/letter from Venetian Contessa (Countess) Magdalena D'Amigliani that said she and Brooks were friends and that the book was hers. Joshua didn't believe her so he wrote back (He sticks the drafts into the book). Saying that no one knew about her, and Joshua can not pass on the book yet, they keep in touch. A bit later in the book he finds a picture of her and is arranged to meet up with her as he falls in love. But when he is reading the book at his hotel he gets another letter, this one is simple and Joshua's note with it is, "I am in Paris, awaiting for the train to Venice, but my mind is in turmoil. This morning I received another message from Magdalena. It was a simple note, with a smaller painting of her in the dress of violet lace attached to it. It is the most terrifying thing I have ever received, for I know for certain now what she is. Truly, I think I have always known. In the same way, I believe I knew long ago that Brooks was much more than an eccentric academic. It is too late to turn back, but I am sure that I am not the first Protector to set out on an uncertain journey." Afterwards there s a hologram picture of her. If you look at it one way, she is wearing a locket smiling normally, but the other way she has no locket, her hair is messy, her eyes are red, and she has fangs. She is a Vampire! On the last page it has Brooks' final words and it tells Joshua to take take the locket of vampire hair(vampires can't kill humans with vampire hair for some reason) and destroy her with the sword of angels (Archangel Michael's sword that he used in fighting The three original Fallen Ones, Moloch, Ba'al and Belial. It is the only sword that can destroy the fallen ones). Brooks also reveals that a long time ago, he and Magdalena were engaged but one night, a vampire attacked them and Magdalena was turned. So Joshua says he will try but we never know for sure. At the end of the book, there is the sword of angels on the back cover, a newspaper clipping about the death of Joshua's friend, Maurice Folley (who may have been killed by Magdalena) and another newspaper clipping about the burning of Palazzo D'Amigliani, which is Magdalena's home, hinting that Joshua may have succeeded in killing Magdalena because it was said that the fire was intense enough to reduce a corpse to ashes.
