 Henry Schoonmaker, the handsome son of a wealthy tycoon, is now married to Penelope Hayes, due to her scheming. Henry refuses to even sleep in the same room as his new wife, as he remains infatuated with Diana Holland. Diana Holland is heartbroken about the marriage, but she acts to appear genuine and gay at the many balls and parties she is obligated to attend to, in order to preserve her family's reputation. She continues to avoid any confrontations with Henry. Her sister, Elizabeth Holland, grieves over the loss of her true love, while growing weaker and more fragile every day. Carolina Broad, a maid turned socialite, is content befriending a wealthy elderly gentleman, Mr.Carey Lewis Longhorn, who continues to provide for her financially. The characters' paths once again intertwine when Henry plans a fishing trip to Florida with his good friend, Teddy Cutting. However, Penelope invites herself along, and offers Carolina Broad the invitation, as well. At a luncheon hosted by the Hollands, Penelope extends the invitation once more to her once good friend, Elizabeth Holland. Meanwhile, Henry confronts Diana on the Holland porch, and explains his piteous situation with Penelope. He then asks her to find a way to secretly meet him in Florida, where they may possibly be together. When Diana returns to the luncheon, Elizabeth presses Penelope to allow her sister to join them, as well. The group of socialites, along with Penelope's older brother, Grayson Hayes, and another member of New York's ellite, Leland Bouchard, travel south to Florida, where they vacation on the beach. Before they arrive, Penelope pulls her brother aside and asks him to play a bit with the younger Holland's heart strings. She then claims the reason for the trouble is mere amusement, but her hidden intentions become clear when she suspects Henry and Diana have planned the trip for their own romantic affairs. However, Penelope's scheme backfires when her brother begins to legitimately fall in love with Diana. Meanwhile, Elizabeth and Teddy rekindle their lost friendship, and Teddy proposes for the third time to Elizabeth. However, when Elizabeth begins to feel a certain attraction to her friend, she is overwhelmed with guilt, due to her past love. Romance blooms further after Carolina discovers she has grown a bit too fond of Leland. Still, it seems Leland has taken a liking to her, as well. At the peak of their romantic expedition, Carolina receives news that Mr. Longhorn has passed on. She then returns to New York to attend his funeral, where she makes the miraculous discovery that he has left all of his estates and wealth to her. She shares this joyous reason with her good friend and part-time lover, Tristan Wrigley. Back in Florida, Henry and Penelope continue to bicker and Penelope threatens Diana's reputation several times when the papers report of Penelope's marital insecurities. Nevertheless, Henry and Diana continue to meet secretly, and express their undying love to each other. Diana, however, feels as if Henry has seduced her into becoming his mistress, and before she has a chance to fully dismiss him, he quickly promises to leave Penelope. Later, Teddy informs Henry that he plans on joining the army and will be shipped to the Philippines. A more worldly Henry then joins Grayson in the bar, where his brother-in-law expresses his love for Diana. Henry feels a ridiculous amount of pride for having claimed her heart, and returns to his hotel room in a drunken state to find Penelope bawling on the balcony. After making a futile attempt at comforting her, Penelope decides that she wants more, and Henry easily gives in to her seduction and they have sex. Diana sees the enviable couple half-naked on their balcony, and assumes that Henry has deceived her. Heartbroken, Diana runs off into the early morning. Later, Henry tells Penelope that their love making was a mistake and he that never should have committed the act. He goes after Diana, who then confronts him, claiming that she no longer loves him. Henry is distraught. After returning to New York, Penelope informs the guests at a Schoonmaker dinner party that she and Henry are expecting a child. Hearing this, a dejected Diana invites Grayson along for a walk through the mansion, where he professes his sincere love to her. He allows her to seduce him and they make love, accidentally witnessed by a horrified Henry. Meanwhile, Elizabeth discovers that she is pregnant with Will's child. When her mother demands she get an abortion, Elizabeth refuses, and plans to proceed with the pregnancy. Snowden, Mr. Holland's former business partner, is told of this and he proposes to her. Elizabeth accepts in order to avoid any scandal. Later, Henry enlists in the army. He notifies a brutally shocked Penelope of this, and accuses her of her false pregnancy. He then sends Diana a long letter, professing his love to her and his apologies. In response, a determined Diana cuts her hair to pass as a man, and runs away to join the army in search of her love.
