Brisingr begins as Eragon, Saphira, and Roran travel to Helgrind, the home of the Ra'zac, the creatures that had killed Eragon's uncle, Garrow. There they rescue Roran's betrothed, Katrina, who was being held prisoner, and kill one of the Ra'zac. Saphira, Roran, and Katrina return to the Varden, while Eragon stays behind to kill the remaining Ra'zac and dole out a suitable punishment to Sloan, Katrina's father who was imprisoned in Helgrind. (Eragon was reluctant to kill him). While he is fighting the remaining Ra'zac, it mentions that Galbatorix has discovered the name of all names. Eragon doesn't understand, and ignores the Ra'zac after it pleads for mercy, and kills him. After consulting the elven Queen Islazadi, they come to an agreement on how to punish Sloan. Sloan is condemned to never meet his daughter again. Eragon arranges affairs so that Sloan will regain eyesight in the future, should he repent for his crimes. As Eragon travels back to the Varden, he confronts a hermit in the name Of Tenga(He is later revealed to be a teacher of the herbalist, Angela). Arya the elf had come in order to protect Eragon, as he traveled through the Empire. They have a conflict with a group of Soldiers, meet some spirits as they travel to the Varden. Arya reveals about her association with Faolin and crafts a boat made of grass,whilst Eragon sings a flower for her. Once they return to the Varden, Eragon discovers that Katrina is pregnant with Roran's child and a wedding is arranged, which Eragon is to conduct. Just before it begins, a small force of enchanted troops attack alongside Murtagh and his dragon, Thorn. The enchanted soldiers had spells cast by Galbatorix that couldn't allow them to feel pain. King Orrin, King of Surda, discovers a method to kill the soldiers, behead them. Elven spell-casters aid Eragon and Saphira and cause Murtagh and Thorn to flee back to the Empire, winning the battle. After the fight, Roran marries Katrina. The leader of the Varden, Nasuada, then orders Eragon to attend the election of the new dwarf king in the Beor Mountains. He leaves with much reluctance as Nasuada forced Saphira to remain in the Varden, in order to protect the Varden from Murtagh and Thorn. Eragon travels with Nar Garzhvog, Leader of the Urgals to Bergan Hold, ancestral home of the Durmigst Ingentium. They see a Shrrg,Nagra and an enormous bear, which Eragon regarded as a threat even for Saphira,on the way. After staying for a brief period in Bergan Hold, where he is shown the forest of stone, Eragon heads to Farthen Dur where the new dwarf king is to be elected. Once among the dwarves in Farthen Dur, Eragon is the target of a failed assassination, found to be the work of the dwarf clan Az Sweldn rak Anhûin, whom the dwarf Orik then forces into exile. Having earned the sympathies of the dwarves, Orik is elected the new king. Saphira arrives to Farthen Dur for Orik's coronation and reconstructs Isidar Mithrim, the star rose which was destroyed in the battle of Farthen Dur.

After Orik's coronation, Eragon and Saphira return to the elven capital Ellesméra to train. There, Saphira revealed from a memory that Eragon's deceased mentor, Brom, is Eragon's father; which Brom asked her to show him when the time was right. Oromis and Glaedr too justify Saphira's revelation. Glaedr also reveals the source of Galbatorix's power: Eldunari,[2] or heart of hearts. An Eldunarí allows the holder to communicate with or draw energy from the dragon it belongs to, even if the dragon is deceased, or a great distance away. Galbatorix spent years collecting Eldunari, and forcing the deceased dragons to channel their energy to him through their Eldunari. Saphira is delighted to learn of the existence of the dragons, although imprisoned by Galbatorix's dark magics. After training, Eragon visits Rhunön, the elven blacksmith who forges swords for Riders. But Rhunön wouldn't create a weapon for him because long ago she swore an oath never to create a weapon again after the Fall of the Riders. Also her stocks of the metal, required to forge rider's swords was completely exhausted. But by deciphering the werecat Solembum's instructions Eragon is able to acquire the metal he requires, from under the roots of the Menoa Tree. After Eragon's repeated requests, Rhunön creates a weapon by controlling Eragon's body. Eragon gives a name to the sword,"Brisingr." As Eragon's body itself forged the sword, a special bond between the sword and Eragon had been created, thus making the sword burst into flames whenever Eragon utters Brisingr, even when he does not intend to use magic. Oromis suspects that "Brisingr" is part of the sword's true name. Before Eragon and Saphira depart for the Varden, Oromis says that the time has come for him and Glaedr to openly oppose the Empire in combat alongside the Queen of the Elves, Islanzadí. Thus, Glaedr gives his own Eldunari to Eragon. If anything should happen to Glaedr, Eragon would still be able to get advice from him. Then Glaedr and Oromis fly to Gil'ead, while Eragon and Saphira fly to Feinster, the city that the Varden are laying siege to.

Meanwhile, Roran is sent on various missions as part of the military force of the Varden. One of the targets is a convoy of supply wagons guarded by enchanted soldiers that can't feel pain. The unit suffers extreme casualties, and the commander Martland Redbeard is replaced after losing his hand. During a mission to attack a large enemy force raiding a village, plans made by the new commander, Captain Edric almost cause the operation to fail, but Roran gives new orders and kills one hundred and ninety-three enemy soldiers by himself, leading the Varden to victory. Despite saving the mission, Roran is charged with insubordination and is flogged as a punishment. After the public whipping, Nasuada promotes Roran to commander and sends his unit on a mission. He leaves in command of a group of both men and Urgals to enforce the idea of men and Urgals working together. When an Urgal, Yarbog, challenges Roran for leadership of the unit, he wrestles the Urgal and forces him to submit. After returning to the Varden, his squad joins the siege of Feinster, a city in the Empire. As the siege begins, Eragon rescues the elf Arya and departs to find the leader of the city, but discovers that three magicians are attempting to create a Shade. While racing to kill the magicians, Eragon has a vision through Glaedr's Eldunarí showing Oromis and Murtagh fighting. Murtagh is using power of several Eldunari, and Glaedr and Thorn fight in the sky. Soon Glaedr is badly wounded. In the midst of the fighting, Galbatorix possesses Murtagh and tries to lure Oromis to his side: when he fails, and after Oromis suffers a seizure, Galbatorix uses Murtagh to kill him and Glaedr is killed shortly after. After the vision, the magicians have managed to create the Shade Varaug. Eragon and Arya fight desperately to slay Varaug. Eragon then distracts Varaug by battling him through the mind. Arya then stabs Varaug in the heart. After the successful siege, Nasuada tells Eragon the Varden's plans for invading the Empire. Arya and Eragon are now both known as Shadeslayers.