 The novel primarily focus on a presidential conspiracy through the actions of President Noah Grace, who realized the inevitable that his nation will fall to the Chimera, announced to his Cabinet of implementing a compromise known as Project Omega which calls for a negotiation between the United States and the Chimera - through the former human being Jordan Shepherd, known as Daedalus. Grace reasoned his decision as a necessary option in having the United States to be spared in the Chimeran War at the expense of the world (as Grace planned to withdraw America's forces from other theaters of conflict). Furthermore, Grace, privately, intended the negotiations to save himself, and only himself. This decision is met with disgust and outrage from Grace's Secretary of War Henry Walker, who recognized this as treason and secretly records Grace's plans. After Project Omega was overall accepted by Grace's cabinet, Walker fled with his wife to the resistance group Freedom First in Chimera-occupied Chicago in order to expose Project Omega; however, while en-route to the city the Walkers are captured by the Chimera and taken to a mining pit in Wisconsin alongside with the other human prisoners that is being used as a conversion center. Henry Walker's absence became aware by Grace who ordered a manhunt on Walker either dead or alive. In which the search for Walker was led by Chief of Staff William Dentweiler, who is also in charged of Daedalus's capture. Meanwhile, Nathan Hale returned to his adopted home in South Dakota, now under Gray Territory, to learn the fate of his foster family. Unfortunately, he soon discovered that his entire family were killed during the invasion save for his foster sister, Susan Farley, who had escaped the slaughter. Following his fore-naught search, Hale and his unit Echo Team were ordered by Dentweiler to find Walker on the basis that the former Secretary of War is betraying his species to the Chimera. Following a lead in Chicago after contacting Freedom First, they only to learn that Walker hadn't came to Freedom First. Still unaware of Walker's capture by the Chimera, SRPA sent Hale to infiltrate a Freedom First training camp in Montana to learn of Walker's whereabouts but only to be outed when reunited with Susan, who had joined Freedom First. Hale is released on good relations for previously fighting alongside Freedom First in Chicago, and came out empty handed on Walker. Susan also refuses to come with Hale as she had decided to remain with Freedom First due to her disillusionment with the Grace administration and it's increasingly totalitarian nature. By December, William Dentweiler successfully captured Daedalus after luring him to rescue his wife Hannah, who was apprehended against her will, from torture by government agents, and then being brought to a military base near Sheridan, Wyoming while threatened under electrocution to prevent his escape and establish his cooperation. The news of Daedalus's capture enlightened President Grace to carry out a "Victory Tour" in the American heartland from the nation's temporarily capital in Denver (after Washington, D.C. was struck by a Spire attack). At this moment, Susan and another Freedom First rebel plot to take advantage of the Victory Tour to assassinate the president. As Grace prepares a speech in front of Denver's Capitol, Susan prepares to kill Grace by sniper fire but only to be spotted by Hale, who was assigned as leader of a Sentinel security detachment for the president, foil the assassination and leading to Susan's immediate arrest. In Wisconsin, Henry Walker - who had lost his wife - and the other prisoners made an escape attempt through building escape tunnels. Only a few prisoners made out of the pit, among them Harley Burl, who was befriended by Walker, was able to escape to American territory and informed SRPA of Walker's location. A Sentinel strike force is deployed to the mining pit. Hale joins the strike force alongside with Burl and William Dentweiler, who the latter had insisted to come along to ensure Walker's death. After rescuing the prisoners, Burl learned from them that Walker had been taken and converted. He then informs to Hale about what he learned from Walker about Project Omega and the recordings he possessed. Hale detained Dentweiler and ordered his Sentinels to search for Walker; however, they are set upon by more Chimeran forces in which during the battle Dentweiler escaped and had fled inside the conversion center. Hale and several Sentinels enters the center and find the Chief of Staff having been cocooned and nearly converted into a Chimera. Dentweiler is then euthanized and Walker's recordings are salvaged. After learning the full disclosure of Project Omega through Walker's recording, Hale traveled to Sheridan where Grace had arrived to negotiate the terms with Daedalus. Hale, as head of the SRPA Sentinel detachment of the president's security team, easily accesses the chamber Grace is interrogating Shepherd in and, instead of killing Daedalus when he has the chance, he shoots Grace in the head with his rifle, killing him. Daedalus then immediately take advantage of Grace's death and breaks free of his confinement by sending out a mental blast and paralyzed every human being within the vicinity, as he escaped to an awaiting Chimeran battlecruiser. Shortly thereafter, Daedalus is blamed on Grace's death and the entire events of Omega is covered up to the general population. Hale's superior Major Richard Blake plans on notifying Vice President Harvey McCullen of his sudden succession.
